# Modeling your NoSQL database or Apache Cassandra database

A generic musical startup (represented here with autogenerated data) wants to analyze the data they've been collecting on songs and user activity on their new music streaming app. The analysis team is particularly interested in understanding what songs users are listening to. Currently, there is no easy way to query the data to generate the results, since the data reside in a directory of CSV files on user activity on the app.

They'd like a data engineer to create an Apache Cassandra database which can create queries on song play data to answer the questions, and wish to bring you on the project. Your role is to create a database for this analysis. You'll be able to test your database by running queries given to you by the analytics team from the startup to create the results.

This is an extension of PostgeSQL project described in this same repo at: [PostreSQL Data Modeling](../PostgresDataModeling/)

## Project Steps

1. Design tables to answer the queries outlined in the project template
2. Write Apache Cassandra CREATE KEYSPACE and SET KEYSPACE statements
3. Develop your CREATE statement for each of the tables to address each question
4. Load the data with INSERT statement for each of the tables
5. Include IF NOT EXISTS clauses in your CREATE statements to create tables only if the tables do not already exist. We recommend you also include DROP TABLE statement for each table, this way you can run drop and create tables whenever you want to reset your database and test your ETL pipeline
6. Test by running the proper select statements with the correct WHERE clause
7. Build ETL Pipeline
8. Implement the logic in section Part I of the notebook template to iterate through each event file in event_data to process and create a new CSV file in Python
9. Make necessary edits to Part II of the notebook template to include Apache Cassandra CREATE and INSERT statements to load processed records into relevant tables in your data model
10. Test by running SELECT statements after running the queries on your database

## ELT Pipeline

`etl.ipynb` provided ETL steps on modeling the Keyspaces in Cassandra based on query requirement that will be run often.
